# 1. Introduction {.page_break_before}

The Open Science realization in Europe is implementing the European Open Science Cloud (EOSC). The
EOSC aims at providing researchers with a unique, federated and inclusive view of fit-for-purpose
services, developed and operated by the diverse European research infrastructures, including the
underlying e-Infrastructures. Consequently, the ultimate success of the EOSC heavily relies on the
quality aspects of those services, such as their stability or functional suitability.

The meaning of **Service** can be regarded from different perspectives. From an IT Service
Management (ITSM) standpoint, such as the EOSC Service Management System (SMS) process model, a
**Service** is devised as a means to "provide value to the customer". The same goal is shared by the
DevOps paradigm, but in this case there is a more pragmatic vision that the customer satisfaction is
achieved through the continuous delivery of quality-assured **Services**, with a shorter life cycle,
as the final outcome of a comprehensive software development process.

The ITSM model has a broader focus. A **Service** is an "intangible asset" that also includes
additional activities such as customer engagement and support. Consequently, it is a much heavier
process that might not be appropriately applicable for all types of **Services**. The DevOps model,
on the other hand, narrows down the scope to meet the user expectations by acting exclusively on the
quality features of the **Service**, which is seen as an aggregate of software components in
operation.

# 2. Purpose

This document provides an initial approach to **Service Quality Assurance**, meant to be applied in
the integration process of the **Services** existing under the EOSC-Synergy project, which
eventually will be accessible as part of the EOSC offerings.

The criteria compiled in this document favours a pragmatic and systematic approach, putting emphasis
on the programmatic assessment of the quality conventions. As such, the criteria herein compiled
builds on the DevOps culture already established in the Software Quality Assurance baseline document
[@https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/160086], to outline the set of good practices that seek the
usability and reliability of **Services**, and meet the user expectations in terms of functional
requirements.

# 3. Contextualization of a Service

As a result, a **Service**, as conceived in this document, represents the following:

* **Web Service** [@https://techterms.com/definition/web_service]:

  * A **Web Service** is an application or data source that is accessible via a standard web
    protocol (HTTP or HTTPS).

  * **Web Services** are designed to communicate with other programs, rather than directly with
    users.

  * Most **Web Services** provide an API, or a set of functions and commands, that can be used to
    access the data.

* **Web Application** [@https://techterms.com/definition/web_application]:

  * A **Web Application** or "Web App" is a software program that is delivered over the Internet and
    is accessed through a web browser.

* **Platform / Service Composition** [@https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/Service_Composition]:

  * Aggregation of multiple small services into larger services, according to a service-oriented
    (SOA) and/or microservices architecture.

  * An integrated set of **Web Services**, **Web Applications** and software components.

Examples are: Web portals, Scientific portals and gateways, data repositories.
