## Quality Criteria

The following sections describe the quality conventions and best
practices that apply to the development, operation and integration
phases of a **Service** with a production infrastructure for research,
such as the EOSC ecosystem. These guidelines rule the **Service** development
and operation process within the framework of the EOSC-Synergy project.

Some of the criteria in this document is similar or based on the
document "Software Quality Assurance baseline"
[@url:https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/160086]. For such cases the
following tag is added to the criteria: [SQA-QC.XyNN] where QC.XyNN is
the codename of the criteria in that document.

### API Testing [SvcQC.Api]

Web services commonly use application programming interfaces (APIs) to expose
the available features to external consumers, which can be either oriented to
the end-user or suitable for machine-to-machine communications.

An accurate implementation of a publicly-accessible API is driven by a clearly
defined specification. The OpenAPI Specification (OAS)
[@url:https://www.openapis.org/] provides the most suitable way to describe,
compose, consume and validate APIs. The following requirements assume the
presence of such an API specification.

* **[SvcQC.Api01]** API testing MUST cover the validation of the features
outlined in the specification (aka _contract testing_).
  * **[SvcQC.Api01.1]** Any change in the API not compliant with the OAS MUST
  NOT pass contract testing.
  * **[SvcQC.Api01.2]** The use of OAS SHOULD narrow down the applicable set of
  test cases to the features described in the specification, avoiding unnecessary
  assertions.
  <!--
  * [Future Link to the SW baseline] OAS fosters test-driven development (TDD)
  as the de-facto scenario for API development: i) writing the specification,
  ii) writing tests, and iii) implementing the API endpoints
  -->

* **[SvcQC.Api02]** API testing MUST include the assessment of the
  security-related criteria outlined in [SvcQC.Sec] section.

* **[SvcQC.Api03]** API testing SHOULD involve the use of test doubles, such
as mock servers or stubs, that act as a validation layer for the incoming
requests.

### Integration Testing [SvcQC.Int]

Integration testing refers to the evaluation of the interactions among
coupled **Services** or parts of a system that cooperate to achieve a given
functionality.

* **[SvcQC.Int01]** Whenever a new functionality is involved, integration
testing MUST guarantee the operation of any previously-working interaction
with external **Services**. [SQA-QC.Int01].
  * When using APIs, contract testing MUST detect any disruption in the
  communication between provider and consumer endpoints, through the validation
  of the API specification [SvcQC.Api01].

* **[SvcQC.Int02]** Integration testing SHOULD be automated.

* **[SvcQC.Int03]** Ad-hoc pilot **Service** infrastructures and/or local
testbeds MAY be used to cope with the integration testing requirements. [SQA-QC.Int04].

### Functional tests [SvcQC.Fun]
Functional testing is a type of black-box testing. It involves the verification
of the **Service** identified functionality, based on requested requirements and
agreed design specifications. This type of **Service** testing focus on the evaluation
of the functionality that the **Service** exposes, leaving apart any internal
design analysis or side-effects to external systems.

* **[SvcQC.Fun01]** Functional testing SHOULD tend to cover the full scope
--e.g. positive, negative, edge cases-- for the set of functionality that the
**Service** claims to provide. [SQA-QC.Fun01].
  * **[SvcQC.Fun01.1]** When using APIs, contract testing MUST detect any
  disruption in the features exposed by the provider to the consumer, through
  the validation of the API specification. [SvcQC.Api01].
  * **[SvcQC.Fun01.2]** Functional tests SHOULD include the Web interface of
  the **Service**.

* **[SvcQC.Fun02]** Functional tests SHOULD be checked automatically.

* **[SvcQC.Fun03]** Functional tests SHOULD be provided by the developers
  of the underlying software. [SQA-QC.Fun04].

### Performance tests [SvcQC.Per]

Performance testing verifies that the software meets the specified performance
requirements and assesses performance characteristics - for instance,
capacity and response time [@url:http://www.swebok.org].

Stress or Load testing, exercises software at the maximum design load, as well as beyond it,
with the goal of determining the behavioral limits, and to test defense
mechanisms in critical systems [@url:http://www.swebok.org]. *Stress testing is
a subset of Performance testing*
[@url:https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-performance-and-stress-testing/].

Scalability testing is test methodology in which an application’s or **Service**
performance is measured in terms of its ability to scale up *and/or* scale out the
number of user requests or other such performance measure attributes, through
an increase in the amount of available resources. The definition
is based on [@url:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2737182.2737185].
*Scalability testing is a subset of Performance testing*.

Elasticity is based on how quickly **Services** in an infrastructure are able to
adapt [@url:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2737182.2737185], in response
to variable demand or workload for those service(s) [@doi:10.1186/s13677-019-0134-y].
*Elasticity testing is a subset of Performance testing*.

* **[SvcQC.Per01]** Performance testing SHOULD be carried out to check the
  **Service** performance under varying loads.

* **[SvcQC.Per02]** Stress testing SHOULD be carried out to check the
  **Service** to determine the behavioral limits under sudden increased load.

* **[SvcQC.Per03]** Scalability testing MAY be carried out to check the
  **Service** hability to scale up *and/or* scale out when its load reach the limits.

* **[SvcQC.Per04]** Elasticity testing MAY be carried out to check the
  **Service** hability to scale out or scale in, depending on its demand or workload.

### Documentation [SvcQC.Doc]

Documentation is an integral part of any Software or Service. For example,
it describes how and what users can use and interact with it, or how operators can
deploy, configure and manage a given Software or Service.

* **[SvcQC.Doc01]** Documentation MUST be available online, easily
findable and accessible. [SQA-QC.Doc03].

* **[SvcQC.Doc02]** Documentation SHOULD have a Persistent Identifier (PID).

* **[SvcQC.Doc03]** Documentation MUST be version controlled. [SQA-QC.Doc01.1].

* **[SvcQC.Doc04]** Documentation MUST be updated on new **Service** versions
involving any change in the installation, configuration or behaviour of
the **Service**. [SQA-QC.Doc04].

* **[SvcQC.Doc05]** Documentation MUST be updated whenever reported
as inaccurate or unclear. [SQA-QC.Doc05].

* **[SvcQC.Doc06]** Documentation MUST have a non-software license.

* **[SvcQC.Doc07]** Documentation MUST be produced according to the
target audience, varying according to the **Service** specification.
The identified types of documentation and their RECOMMENDED content are:

  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.2]** Deployment and Administration. [SQA-QC.Doc06.3]:
    * Installation and configuration guides.
    * Service Reference Card, with the following RECOMMENDED content:
      * Brief functional description.
      * List of processes or daemons.
      * Init scripts and options.
      * List of configuration files, location and example or template.
      * Log files location and other useful audit information.
      * List of ports.
      * Service state information.
      * List of cron jobs.
      * Security information.
      * FAQs and troubleshooting.
  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.3]** User. [SQA-QC.Doc06.4]:
    * Detailed User Guide for the **Service**.
    * Public API documentation (if applicable).
    * Command-line (CLI) reference (if applicable).

### Security [SvcQC.Sec]

Security assessment is essential for any production **Service**. While an 
effective implementation of the security requirements applies to every stage in 
the software development life cycle (SDLC) --especially effective at the source 
code level, as discussed in [SQA-QC.Sec]--, the security testing of a 
**Service** is also --similarly to the diverse testing strategies previously 
covered-- a black-box type of testing. Hence, this section focuses on the
runtime analysis of security-related requirements, as part of the _Dynamic
Application Security Testing_  (_DAST_). 

Additionally, the compliance with security policies and regulations complements
the analysis, which can be implemented, continuously validated and monitored
through the _Security as Code_ (_SaC_) capabilities. SaC is a particularly
suitable tool for endorsing security of **Service Composition** deployments.

* **[SvcQC.Sec01]** The **Service** public endpoints and APIs MUST be secured
with data encryption.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec01.1]** The **Service** MUST use strong ciphers for data
  encryption.

* **[SvcQC.Sec02]** The **Service** SHOULD have an authentication mechanism.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec02.1]** Whenever dealing with a **Service Composition**, such
  as microservice architectures, the **Services** SHOULD be managed by a
  centralized authentication mechanism.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec02.2]** In publicly-accessible APIs, **Service**
  authentication SHOULD be handled through an API gateway in order to control
  the traffic and protect the backend services from overuse.

* **[SvcQC.Sec03]** The **Service** SHOULD implement an authorization mechanism.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec03.1]** In **Service Composition** environments, the
  authorization mechanism SHOULD uniquely grant the essential access
  permissions for each **Service** according to the principle of least privilege
  (PoLP).

* **[SvcQC.Sec04]** The **Service** MUST validate the credentials and signatures.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec04.1]** Credentials used in the **Service** MUST be signed by
  a recognized and trusted certification authority.

* **[SvcQC.Sec05]** The **Service** MUST handle personal data in compliance with
the applicable regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) within the European boundaries.

* **[SvcQC.Sec06]** The **Service** SHOULD be audited in accordance with the
black-box testing criteria identified by de-facto (cyber)security standards and
good practices.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.1]** DAST checks MUST be executed, through the use of ad-hoc
  tools, directly to an operational **Service** in order to uncover runtime
  security vulnerabilities and any other environment-related issues (e.g. SQL
  injection, cross-site scripting or DDOS). The latest release of OWASP's Web
  Security Testing Guide
  [@url:https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/stable/] and
  the NIST's Technical Guide to Information Security Testing and Assessment
  [@url:https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-115] MUST be considered for 
  carrying out comprehensive **Service** security testing.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.2]** Penetration testing (manual or automated) MAY be part of
  the application security verification effort. [SQA-QC.Sec04].
  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.3]** The security assessment of the target system 
  configuration is particularly important to reduce the risk of security
  attacks. The benchmarks delivered by the Center for Internet
  Security (CIS) [@url:https://www.cisecurity.org/cis-benchmarks/] and the
  NIST's Security Assurance Requirements for Linux Application Container
  Deployments [@url:https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8176] MUST be considered
  for this task.

* **[SvcQC.Sec07]** IaC testing, from [SvcQC.Aud02] criterion, MUST cover the
security auditing of the IaC templates (aka _Security as Code_ or _SaC_) in
order to assure the deployment of secured **Services**. For all the third-party
dependencies used in the IaC templates (including all kind of software artefacts,
such as Linux packages or container-based images):
  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.1]** SaC MUST perform vulnerability scanning of the
  artefact versions in use.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.2]** SaC SHOULD verify that the artefacts are trusted and
  digitally signed.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.3]** SaC MUST scan IaC templates to uncover misalignments
  with widely-accepted security policies from [SvcQC.Sec06] criteria, such as
  non-encrypted secrets or disabled audit logs.
  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.4]** SaC MAY be used to seek, in the IaC templates, for
  violations of security requirements outlined in the applicable regulations
  from criterion [SvcQC.Sec05].

### Policies [SvcQC.Pol]

Policy documents describe what are the users expected behaviour when using the
**Service**, how they can access it and what they can expect regarding privacy
of their data.

* **[SvcQC.Pol01]** The **Service** MUST include the following policy documents:
  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.1]** Acceptable Usage Policy (AUP): Is a set of rules applied
  by the owner, creator or administrator of a network, website, or service, that
  restrict the ways in which the network, website or system may be used and sets
  guidelines as to how it should be used. The AUP can also be referred as: Acceptable
  Use Policy or Fair Use Policy.
  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.2]** Access Policy or Terms of Use: represent a binding legal
  contract between the users (and/or customers), and the Provider of the **Service**.
  The Access Policy mandates the users (and/or customers) access to and the use of
  the Provider’s **Service**.
  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.3]** Privacy Policy: Data privacy statement informing the users
  (and/or costumers), about which personal data is collected and processed when they
  use and interact with the **Service**. It states which rights the users (and/or costumers)
  have regarding the processing of their data.

### Support [SvcQC.Sup]

Support is the formal way by which users and operators of the **Service**
communicate with other operators and/or developers of the **Service**,
in case of problems, be it operational problems or bugs in the
**Service** or underlying Software. Reporting of enhancements, improvements
and even documentation issues.

* **[SvcQC.Sup01]** The **Service** MUST have a tracker or helpdesk
for operational and users issues.

* **[SvcQC.Sup02]** The **Service** SHOULD have a tracker for the
underlying software issues. [SQA-QC.Man01].

* **[SvcQC.Sup03]** The **Service** SHOULD include an Operational
Level Agreement (OLA) with the infrastructure where it is integrated.

* **[SvcQC.Sup04]** The **Service** MAY include Service Level
Agreement (SLA) with user communities.

### Monitoring [SvcQC.Mon]

Monitoring is a periodic testing of the **Service**. It requires a monitoring
service from where tests are executed or sent and results of those tests are shown.
The tests can be the same, in part or in total of the Functional tests.
The technology used for the monitoring, is left to the developers of the underlying
software to decide eventually with input from the infrastructure(s),
where the **Service** is foreseen to be integrated.

* **[SvcQC.Mon01]** The **Service** in an operational production state SHOULD
  be monitored for functional-related criteria:
  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.1]** The **Service** public endpoints MUST be monitored.
  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.2]** The **Service** public APIs MUST be monitored. Use
  functional tests of criteria [SvcQC.Fun01.2].
  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.3]** The **Service** Web interface MAY be monitored. Use
  functional tests of criteria [SvcQC.Fun01.3].

* **[SvcQC.Mon02]** The **Service** MUST be monitored for security-related
  criteria:
  * **[SvcQC.Mon02.1]** The **Service** MUST be monitored for public endpoints
  and APIs secured and strong ciphers for encryption. Use Security tests of
  criteria [SvcQC.Sec02] and [SvcQC.Sec05].
  * **[SvcQC.Mon02.2]** The **Service** SHOULD be monitored with DAST checks.
  Use Security tests of criteria [SvcQC.Sec06].

* **[SvcQC.Mon03]** The **Service** MUST be monitored for infrastructure-related
  criteria:
  * **[SvcQC.Mon03.1]** IaC (unit) tests [SvcQC.Aud02] SHOULD be reused as
  monitoring tests, thus avoiding duplication.

### Automated Deployment [SvcQC.Aud]

The automated deployment of **Services** implies the use of code to install and
configure them in the target infrastructures. Infrastructure as Code (IaC)
templates allow operations team to treat service provisioning and deployment in
a similar fashion as developers manage the software code.

Consequently, IaC enables the paradigm of immutable infrastructure deployment
and maintenance, where **Services** are never updated, but deprovisioned and
redeployed. An immutable infrastructure simplifies maintenance and enhances
repeteability and reliability.

* **[SvcQC.Aud01]** A production-ready **Service** SHOULD be deployed as a
workable system with the minimal user or system administrator interaction
leveraging IaC templates.

* **[SvcQC.Aud02]** Any future change to a deployed **Service** SHOULD be
  done in the form of a new deployment, in order to preserve immutable
  infrastructures.

* **[SvcQC.Aud03]** IaC SHOULD be validated by specific (unit) testing
frameworks for every change being done.
  * **[SvcQC.Aud03.1]** IaC (unit) tests MUST be idempotent.

### Metrics [SvcQC.Met]

A metric is a quantifiable measure that is used to track and assess
the status of a specific process.

In the case of **Services**, some relevant metrics are the number
of users registered in the **Service**, or using it actively. Also
accounting is important to track resource usage per user or group
of users, either or both computing and storage resources.

Although the the metrics maybe published in external services, this
is a common case in federated infrastructures such as EOSC.

* **[SvcQC.Met01]** The **Service** SHOULD implement the collection
of metrics.
  * **[SvcQC.Met01.1]** The collection of metrics SHOULD be comulative
  over time and timestamped, so that the values can be queried per
  time interval.
  * **[SvcQC.Met01.2]** The metric *Number of registered users* SHOULD
  be collected.
  * **[SvcQC.Met01.3]** The metric *Number of active users over a given period of time*
  MAY be collected.
  * **[SvcQC.Met01.4]** The metric *Amount of computing resources per user or per group*
  MAY be collected. The metric unit depends on the type of service and infrastructure.
  An example is CPU x hours.
  * **[SvcQC.Met01.5]** The metric *Amount of storage resources per user or per group*
  MAY be collected. The metric unit depends on the type of service and infrastructure.
  An example is GByte x hours.
