# 6. Quality Criteria {.page_break_before}

The following sections describe the quality conventions and best practices that apply to the
development, operation and integration phases of a **Service** with a production infrastructure for
research, such as the EOSC ecosystem. These guidelines rule the **Service** development and
operation process within the framework of the EOSC-Synergy project.

The criteria in this document complements the criteria described in the "Software Quality Assurance
baseline" [@https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/160086], while following the same pragmatic DevOps
approach of automation.

## 6.1. Automated Deployment [SvcQC.Dep] {#dep}

The automated deployment of **Services** implies the use of code to install and configure them in
the target infrastructures. Infrastructure as Code (IaC) templates allow operations teams to treat
service provisioning and deployment in a similar fashion as developers manage the software code.

Consequently, IaC enables the paradigm of immutable infrastructure deployment and maintenance, where
**Services** are never updated, but deprovisioned and redeployed. An immutable infrastructure
simplifies maintenance and enhances repeatability and reliability.

* **[SvcQC.Dep01]** A production-ready **Service** **SHOULD** be deployed as a workable system with
  the minimal user or system administrator interaction leveraging IaC templates.

* **[SvcQC.Dep02]** Any future change to a deployed **Service** **SHOULD** be done in the form of a
  new deployment, in order to preserve immutable infrastructures.

* **[SvcQC.Dep03]** IaC **SHOULD** be validated by specific (unit) testing frameworks for every
  change being done.

  * **[SvcQC.Dep03.1]** IaC (unit) tests **MUST** be idempotent.

## 6.2. API Testing [SvcQC.Api] {#api01}

Web services commonly use application programming interfaces (APIs) to expose the available features
to external consumers, which can be either oriented to the end-user or suitable for
machine-to-machine communications.

Accurate implementation of a publicly-accessible API, is driven by a clearly defined specification.
The OpenAPI Specification (OAS) [@https://www.openapis.org] provides the most suitable way to
describe, compose, consume and validate APIs. The following requirements assume the presence of such
an API specification.

* **[SvcQC.Api01]** API testing **MUST** cover the validation of the features outlined in the
  specification (aka _contract testing_).

  * **[SvcQC.Api01.1]** Any change in the API not compliant with the OAS **MUST NOT** pass contract
    testing.

  * **[SvcQC.Api01.2]** The use of OAS **SHOULD** narrow down the applicable set of test cases to
    the features described in the specification, avoiding unnecessary assertions.

* **[SvcQC.Api02]** API testing **MUST** include the assessment of the security-related criteria
  outlined in [SvcQC.Sec](#security) section.

* **[SvcQC.Api03]** API testing **SHOULD** involve the use of test doubles, such as mock servers or
  stubs, that act as a validation layer for the incoming requests.

## 6.3. Integration Testing [SvcQC.Int]

Integration testing refers to the evaluation of the interactions among coupled **Services** or parts
of a system that cooperate to achieve a given functionality.

* **[SvcQC.Int01]** Whenever a new functionality is involved, integration testing **MUST** guarantee
  the operation of any previously-working interaction with external **Services**.

  * **[SvcQC.Int01.1]** When using APIs, contract testing **MUST** detect any disruption in the
    communication between provider and consumer endpoints, through the validation of the API
    specification [SvcQC.Api01](#api01).

* **[SvcQC.Int02]** Integration testing **MUST NOT** rely on non-operational or out-of-the-warranty
  services.

* **[SvcQC.Int03]** On lack of automation, ad-hoc pilot **Service** infrastructures and/or local
  testbeds **MAY** be used to cope with the integration testing requirements.
  
* **[SvcQC.Int04]** In the presence of CI environments, integration tests **SHOULD** be suitable for
  the automated testing.

## 6.4. Functional tests [SvcQC.Fun] {#fun}

Functional testing is a type of black-box testing. It involves the verification of the **Service**
identified functionality, based on requested requirements and agreed design specifications. This
type of **Service** testing focuses on the evaluation of the functionality that the **Service**
exposes, leaving apart any internal design analysis or side-effects to external systems.

* **[SvcQC.Fun01]** Functional testing **SHOULD** tend to cover the full scope --e.g. positive,
  negative, edge cases-- for the set of functionality that the **Service** claims to provide.

  * **[SvcQC.Fun01.1]** When using APIs, contract testing **MUST** detect any disruption in the
    features exposed by the provider to the consumer, through the validation of the API
    specification. [SvcQC.Api01](#api01).

  * **[SvcQC.Fun01.2]** Functional tests **SHOULD** include the Web Interface or Graphical User
    Interface (GUI) of the **Service**.

* **[SvcQC.Fun02]** Functional tests **SHOULD** be checked automatically.

* **[SvcQC.Fun03]** Functional tests **SHOULD** be provided by the developers of the underlying
  software.

## 6.5. Performance tests [SvcQC.Per]

Performance testing verifies that the software meets the specified performance requirements and
assesses performance characteristics - for instance, capacity and response time
[@http://www.swebok.org].

Stress or Load testing, exercises software at the maximum design load, as well as beyond it, with
the goal of determining the behavioral limits, and to test defense mechanisms in critical systems
[@http://www.swebok.org]. _Stress testing is a subset of Performance testing_
[@https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/difference-between-performance-and-stress-testing].

Scalability testing is a test methodology in which an applicationâ€™s or **Service** performance is
measured in terms of its ability to scale up _and/or_ scale out the number of user requests or
other such performance measure attributes, through an increase in the amount of available resources.
The definition is based on [@doi:10.1145/2737182.2737185]. _Scalability testing is a subset of
Performance testing_.

Elasticity is based on how quickly **Services** in an infrastructure are able to adapt
[@doi:10.1145/2737182.2737185], in response to variable demand or workload for those service(s)
[@doi:10.1186/s13677-019-0134-y]. _Elasticity testing is a subset of Performance testing_.

* **[SvcQC.Per01]** Performance testing **SHOULD** be carried out to check the **Service**
  performance under varying loads.

* **[SvcQC.Per02]** Stress testing **SHOULD** be carried out to check the **Service** to determine
  the behavioral limits under sudden increased load.

* **[SvcQC.Per03]** Scalability testing **MAY** be carried out to check the **Service** ability to
  scale up or scale down when its load reaches the limits.

* **[SvcQC.Per04]** Elasticity testing **MAY** be carried out to check the **Service** ability to
  scale out or scale in, depending on its demand or workload.

## 6.6. Security [SvcQC.Sec] {#security}

Security assessment is essential for any production **Service**. While an effective implementation
of the security requirements applies to every stage in the software development life cycle (SDLC)
--especially effective at the source code level, as discussed in
[@https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/160086], section _Security **[SQA-QC.Sec]**_--, the security
testing of a **Service** is also --similarly to the diverse testing strategies previously covered--
a black-box type of testing. Hence, this section focuses on the runtime analysis of security-related
requirements, as part of the _Dynamic Application Security Testing_  (_DAST_) as well as the
_Interactive Application Security Testing_ (_IAST_).

Additionally, the compliance with security policies and regulations complements the analysis, which
can be implemented, continuously validated and monitored through the _Security as Code_ (_SaC_)
capabilities. SaC is a particularly suitable tool for endorsing security of **Service Composition**
deployments.

* **[SvcQC.Sec01]** The **Service** public endpoints and APIs **MUST** be secured with data
  encryption.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec01.1]** The **Service** **MUST** use strong ciphers for data encryption.

* **[SvcQC.Sec02]** The **Service** **SHOULD** have an authentication mechanism.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec02.1]** Whenever dealing with a **Service Composition**, such as microservice
    architectures, the **Services** **SHOULD** be managed by a centralized authentication mechanism.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec02.2]** In publicly-accessible APIs, **Service** authentication **SHOULD** be
    handled through an API gateway in order to control the traffic and protect the backend services
    from overuse.

* **[SvcQC.Sec03]** The **Service** **SHOULD** implement an authorization mechanism.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec03.1]** In **Service Composition** environments, the authorization mechanism
    **SHOULD** uniquely grant the essential access permissions for each **Service** according to the
    _Principle of Least Privilege_ (_PoLP_).

* **[SvcQC.Sec04]** The **Service** **MUST** validate the credentials and signatures.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec04.1]** Credentials used in the **Service** **MUST** be signed by a recognized and
    trusted certification authority.

* **[SvcQC.Sec05]** The **Service** **MUST** handle personal data in compliance with the applicable
  regulations, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) within the European boundaries.

* **[SvcQC.Sec06]** The **Service** **SHOULD** be audited in accordance with the black-box testing
  criteria identified by de-facto (cyber)security standards and good practices.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.1]** Dynamic application security testing (DAST) checks **MUST** be executed,
    through the use of ad-hoc tools, directly to an operational **Service** in order to uncover
    runtime security vulnerabilities and any other environment-related issues (e.g. SQL injection,
    cross-site scripting or DDOS). The latest release of OWASP's Web Security Testing Guide
    [@https://owasp.org/www-project-web-security-testing-guide/stable] and the NIST's Technical
    Guide to Information Security Testing and Assessment [@doi:10.6028/NIST.SP.800-115] **MUST** be
    considered for carrying out comprehensive **Service** security testing.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.2]** Interactive Application Security Testing (IAST)
    [@https://www.veracode.com/security/interactive-application-security-testing-iast], analyzes
    code for security vulnerabilities while the app is run by an automated test. IAST **SHOULD** be
    performed to a service in an operating state.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.3]** Penetration testing (manual or automated) **MAY** be part of the application
    security verification effort.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec06.4]** The security assessment of the target system configuration is particularly
    important to reduce the risk of security attacks. The benchmarks delivered by the Center for
    Internet Security (CIS) [@https://www.cisecurity.org/cis-benchmarks] and the NIST's Security
    Assurance Requirements for Linux Application Container Deployments [@doi:10.6028/NIST.IR.8176]
    **MUST** be considered for this task.

* **[SvcQC.Sec07]** IaC testing, from [SvcQC.Aud02](#dep) criterion, **MUST** cover the security
  auditing of the IaC templates (_SaC_) in order to assure the deployment of secured **Services**.
  For all the third-party dependencies used in the IaC templates (including all kind of software
  artifacts, such as Linux packages or container-based images):

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.1]** SaC **MUST** perform vulnerability scanning of the artefact versions in use.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.2]** SaC **SHOULD** verify that the artifacts are trusted and digitally signed.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.3]** SaC **MUST** scan IaC templates to uncover misalignments with widely
    accepted security policies from [SvcQC.Sec06](#security) criteria, such as non-encrypted secrets
    or disabled audit logs.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.4]** SaC **MAY** be used to seek, in the IaC templates, for violations of
    security requirements outlined in the applicable regulations from criterion
    [SvcQC.Sec05](#security).

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.5]** World-writable files **SHOULD NOT** be created while the service is in
    operation. Whenever they are required, the relevant files **MUST** be documented.

  * **[SvcQC.Sec07.6]** World-readable files **MUST NOT** contain passwords.

## 6.7. Documentation [SvcQC.Doc]

Documentation is an integral part of any Software or Service. For example, it describes how and what
users can use and interact with it, or how operators can deploy, configure and manage a given
Software or Service.

* **[SvcQC.Doc01]** Documentation **MUST** be available online, easily findable and accessible.

* **[SvcQC.Doc02]** Documentation **SHOULD** have a Persistent Identifier (PID).

* **[SvcQC.Doc03]** Documentation **MUST** be version controlled.

* **[SvcQC.Doc04]** Documentation **MUST** be updated on new **Service** versions involving any
  change in the installation, configuration or behavior of the **Service**.

* **[SvcQC.Doc05]** Documentation **MUST** be updated whenever reported as inaccurate or unclear.

* **[SvcQC.Doc06]** Documentation **SHOULD** have a non-software license.

* **[SvcQC.Doc07]** Documentation **MUST** be produced according to the target audience, varying
  according to the **Service** specification. The identified types of documentation and their
  RECOMMENDED content are:

  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.1]** Deployment and Administration:

    * Installation and configuration guides.

    * Service Reference Card, with the following RECOMMENDED content:

      * Brief functional description.

      * List of processes or daemons.

      * Init scripts and options.

      * List of configuration files, location and example or template.

      * Log files location and other useful audit information.

      * List of ports.

      * Service state information.

      * List of cron jobs.

      * Security information.

      * FAQs and troubleshooting.

  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.2]** User:

    * Detailed User Guide for the **Service**.

    * Public API documentation (if applicable).

    * Command-line (CLI) reference (if applicable).
