# 7. Quality Criteria - Operational {.page_break_before}

This section describes the operational quality criteria that is not fit for automation, but that
contribute to the assessment of the quality of the service when it's in an operational production
state.

## 7.1. Files and documents

### 7.1.1. Documentation [SvcQC.Doc]

Documentation is an integral part of any Software or Service. For example, it describes how and what
users can use and interact with it, or how operators can deploy, configure and manage a given
Software or Service.

* **[SvcQC.Doc01]** Documentation **MUST** be available online, easily findable and accessible.

* **[SvcQC.Doc02]** Documentation **SHOULD** have a Persistent Identifier (PID).

* **[SvcQC.Doc03]** Documentation **MUST** be version controlled.

* **[SvcQC.Doc04]** Documentation **MUST** be updated on new **Service** versions involving any
  change in the installation, configuration or behavior of the **Service**.

* **[SvcQC.Doc05]** Documentation **MUST** be updated whenever reported as inaccurate or unclear.

* **[SvcQC.Doc06]** Documentation **SHOULD** have a non-software license.

* **[SvcQC.Doc07]** Documentation **MUST** be produced according to the target audience, varying
  according to the **Service** specification. The identified types of documentation and their
  RECOMMENDED content are:

  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.1]** Deployment and Administration:

    * Installation and configuration guides.

    * Service Reference Card, with the following RECOMMENDED content:

      * Brief functional description.

      * List of processes or daemons.

      * Init scripts and options.

      * List of configuration files, location and example or template.

      * Log files location and other useful audit information.

      * List of ports.

      * Service state information.

      * List of cron jobs.

      * Security information.

      * FAQs and troubleshooting.

  * **[SvcQC.Doc07.2]** User:

    * Detailed User Guide for the **Service**.

    * Public API documentation (if applicable).

    * Command-line (CLI) reference (if applicable).

### 7.1.2. Policies [SvcQC.Pol]

Policy documents describe what are the user's expected behavior when using the **Service**, how they
can access it and what they can expect regarding privacy of their data.

* **[SvcQC.Pol01]** The **Service** **MUST** include the following policy documents:

  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.1]** Acceptable Usage Policy (AUP): Is a set of rules applied by the owner,
    creator or administrator of a network, **Service** or system, that restrict the ways in which
    the network, **Service** or system may be used and sets guidelines as to how it should be used.
    The AUP can also be referred to as: Acceptable Use Policy or Fair Use Policy.

  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.2]** Access Policy or Terms of Use: represent a binding legal contract between
    the users (and/or customers), and the Provider of the **Service**. The Access Policy mandates
    the users (and/or customers) access to and the use of the Provider’s **Service**.

  * **[SvcQC.Pol01.3]** Privacy Policy: Data privacy statement informing the users (and/or
    customers), about which personal data is collected and processed when they use and interact with
    the **Service**. It states which rights the users (and/or customers) have regarding the
    processing of their data.

## 7.2. Support

## 7.2.1. Support [SvcQC.Sup]

Support is the formal way by which users and operators of the **Service** communicate with other
operators and/or developers of the **Service** in case of problems, be it operational problems or
bugs in the **Service** or underlying Software. Reporting of enhancements, improvements and
documentation issues.

* **[SvcQC.Sup01]** The **Service** **MUST** have a tracker or helpdesk for operational and users
  issues.

* **[SvcQC.Sup02]** The **Service** **SHOULD** have a tracker for the underlying software issues
  [@https://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/160086], section [SQA-QC.Man01].

* **[SvcQC.Sup03]** The **Service** **SHOULD** include an Operational Level Agreement (OLA) with the
  infrastructure where it is integrated.

* **[SvcQC.Sup04]** The **Service** MAY include Service Level Agreement (SLA) with user communities.

## 7.3. Monitoring and Metrics

### 7.3.1. Monitoring [SvcQC.Mon]

Monitoring is a periodic testing of the **Service**. It requires a monitoring service from where
tests are executed or sent and results of those tests are shown. The tests can be the same, in part
or in total of the Functional, Security and Infrastructure tests. The technology used for the
monitoring is left to the developers of the underlying software to decide eventually with input
from the infrastructure(s), where the **Service** is foreseen to be integrated.

* **[SvcQC.Mon01]** The **Service** in an operational production state **SHOULD** be monitored for
  functional-related criteria:

  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.1]** The **Service** public endpoints **MUST** be monitored.

  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.2]** The **Service** public APIs **MUST** be monitored. Use functional tests of
    criteria [SvcQC.Fun01.1](#fun).

  * **[SvcQC.Mon01.3]** The **Service** Web interface **MAY** be monitored. Use functional tests of
    criteria [SvcQC.Fun01.2](#fun).

* **[SvcQC.Mon02]** The **Service** **MUST** be monitored for security-related criteria:

  * **[SvcQC.Mon02.1]** The **Service** **MUST** be monitored for public endpoints and APIs secured
    and strong ciphers for encryption. Use Security tests of criteria [SvcQC.Sec01](#security).

  * **[SvcQC.Mon02.2]** The **Service** **SHOULD** be monitored with DAST checks. Use Security tests
    of criteria [SvcQC.Sec06.1](#security).

* **[SvcQC.Mon03]** The **Service** **MUST** be monitored for infrastructure-related criteria:

  * **[SvcQC.Mon03.1]** IaC (unit) tests [SvcQC.Dep02](#dep) **SHOULD** be reused as monitoring
    tests, thus avoiding duplication.

### 7.3.2. Metrics [SvcQC.Met]

A metric is a quantifiable measure used to track and assess the status of a specific process.

In the case of **Services**, some relevant metrics are the number of users registered in the
**Service**, or of active users. Also accounting is important to track resource usage per user or
group of users, either or both computing and storage resources.

Although the metrics may be published in external services managed by the infrastructure, this is a
common case in federated infrastructures such as EOSC.

* **[SvcQC.Met01]** The **Service** **SHOULD** implement the collection of metrics.

  * **[SvcQC.Met01.1]** The collection of metrics **SHOULD** be cumulative over time and
    timestamped, so that the values can be queried per time interval.

  * **[SvcQC.Met01.2]** The metric *Number of registered users* **SHOULD** be collected.

  * **[SvcQC.Met01.3]** The metric *Number of active users over a given period of time* **MAY** be
    collected.

  * **[SvcQC.Met01.4]** The metric *Amount of computing resources per user or per group* **MAY** be
    collected. The metric unit depends on the type of service and infrastructure. An example is
    `CPU x hours`.

  * **[SvcQC.Met01.5]** The metric *Amount of storage resources per user or per group* **MAY** be
    collected. The metric unit depends on the type of service and infrastructure. An example is
    `TByte x month`.
